---
layout: blog
title: Test
subtitle: One to Add to your Regular Rotation!
featured-image: Blog/lemon-dijon-chicken_h8gm0z.jpg
image: Blog/lemon-dijon-chicken_h8gm0z.jpg
alt: Lemon Dijon Chicken
description: You all asked for dinner ideas and this will quickly become a crowd favorite. It is easy to whip together and can be prepared the morning or afternoon before dinner. I love to serve it with a side of green beans and sweet potatoes but it would pair great with rice.
tags:  recipes gluten-free egg-free paleo vegan dinner
comments: true
permalink:
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BvCzjGSuHgo" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

You all asked for dinner ideas and this will quickly become a crowd favorite. It is easy to whip together and can be prepared the morning or afternoon before dinner. I love to serve it with a side of green beans and sweet potatoes but it would pair great with rice. I think grilled chicken thigh is just the best but you can also cook it on the stove stop.

Lemon Dijon Chicken
SERVINGS: 4

Ingredients
Marinade:
* 4-6 pieces of chicken thigh
* ¼ cup avocado oil
* 1 lemon juiced
* 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
* ½ tablespoon honey (optional)
* 1 tablespoon dried rosemary
* 1 teaspoon garlic powder
* 1 teaspoon onion powder
* 1 teaspoon smoked paprika
* Fresh ground pepper and fine sea salt

Feta Sauce:
* 5 tablespoons vegenaise (or regular mayo)
* ¼ cup chopped feta
* 2 tablespoons water
* 1 teaspoon red wine vinegar
* 1 teaspoon Italian seasoning
* 1 teaspoon garlic powder
* 1 teaspoon onion powder
* ¼ teaspoon red chili fakes (optional)
* Fresh ground pepper and fine sea salt

Instructions
1. In a large zip lock bag place the chicken and all the ingredients for the marinade. Close tightly and shake until marinade is mixed and evenly coated on the chicken. Marinade in the fridge for 2-6 hours.
2. In a medium sized bowl combine all the ingredients for the feta sauce and whisk until smooth and creamy. Store in the fridge until ready to use.
3. Preheat the grill to 425 F. Grill for 25-30 minutes, until chicken is cooked through and edges are crispy and light brown (Cook time is variable as it depends on each grill).
4. Serve with your choice of side!
